Chapter 1 An Indomitable King

Gilgamesh was the most handsome of all the children of men. His father's name was Lugalbanda. His mother was the divine Ninsun, a beautiful and proud woman, who had the magical power to make wild buffalo obey. That is why she was nicknamed "the wild cow." With the milk she fed her son, she transmitted to him the strength of the buffalo. Without this strength received from his mother, would he have had the courage to cross the mountains, to venture into regions the sun never illuminates, to cross the immense sea? Yes, King Gilgamesh was well-born. Unparalleled power and beauty, that is what he had received as his birthright.

When he began to reign over Uruk-of-the-Enclosures, Gilgamesh did not know the limits of his strength. He liked to walk proudly through the city streets. He was arrogant, insolent. "I

11 -

am the king, I do as a king does," he would declare with a disdainful air. Who could have stood up to him?

His pride became so immense that he began to inflict a reign of terror on his city. All the women, all the daughters of the land, he thought, were his property. As soon as he left his palace, the young girls were quickly warned so they could go home and hide with the women. Even the men avoided him because he was quick to anger. He had an escort to protect him, but he cared little about putting himself in danger. He was so sure of his strength! And he wielded weapons so well! He always found a reason to start a fight: "You're about to find out who I am," he would threaten. He would go on the attack and leave the poor soul who had the misfortune to cross his path half-dead. Then, calmly, he would continue his walk.
The inhabitants of Uruk gathered in secret.

"What are we going to do?" they asked one another. "Lugalbanda's son is becoming unbearable. He harasses our wives, he dishonors our daughters. The strongest among us get beaten up. Are we not honest citizens of the city? Do we not have a right to respect?"

"The best thing to do," one of them proposed, "is to complain to the Great Gods. Let's offer them tasty little dishes, let's send up to them the smoke of rich, fatty meats. They will smell

12

the aroma, they will rejoice, and they will surely end up listening to our complaints."

So offerings were made, and the Great Gods eventually heard the inhabitants' complaint. They went to find Anu, the lord god of Uruk:

"Was it not you who installed this wretched Gilgamesh in his city? Do you know that he sows terror in his wake? The inhabitants have built a beautiful temple for you and for your lady Ishtar. Can you do nothing for them?"
Then, they went to find the goddess Aruru, whose craft was to create humans:

"Was it not you who formed men? Then obey Anu. He is going to ask you to create a man more terrible than a hurricane. He will confront Gilgamesh. Thus the people of Uruk will have peace."

Aruru heard their counsel and responded favorably to the god Anu's request. After dipping her hands in water, she took a large piece of clay and placed it in the steppe. She worked the clay to fashion a creature: the legs, the torso, the arms, the head emerged from her expert hands. The clay creature began to live. And so, in the solitude of the steppe, Enkidu the wild man was born.

13

The Wild Man

Enkidu's body was all hairy, with long hair that rippled like ears of wheat under the caress of the wind. And with that, he was as sturdy and massive as the god of War! Born in the deserted wilderness, he grew up without seeing a single human being. He was a wild child, a rough-hewn creature. The beasts were his company; he grazed with the gazelles, he went to drink at the pools with the wild animals. From his mouth came inarticulate cries, like the belling of stags or the grunting of wild boars.

One day, a young hunter was passing through the area. He knew the favorite spots of the herds¹ well, always set his traps in the right place, dug pits on the animals' paths and covered them with reeds. That day, he had come to check the traps he had set a few days before. He had left his home before the sun had risen and, now, he was walking silently over marshy ground. He proceeded cautiously, probing the brown water with his spear and trying to find his bearings in the rare breaks in the fog that crept over the marsh.

He finally reached firmer ground and spotted a stretch of clear water. He told himself that, after

Herds: herds of wild animals.

14

all, the traps could wait and he lay in wait, in case a herd of does and stags came to drink at sunrise. He set down his spear, his bow and his arrows, threw a few twigs in the air to check that the wind was in his favor. In this treeless land, the hunter's art lay in his ability to remain perfectly still; no sharp-eyed bird, no shepherd moving his flock, was to spot the hunter, huddled up, blended into the landscape like a clod of earth caressed by the wind.

The hunter waited, dreaming of the doe that might appear at any moment at the water's edge. He thought about how he would hurl his spear so that it would split the air and strike the beast at the withers. Then, quick as lightning, he would rush forward to slit its throat.

Tired of waiting, the hunter dozed off. The sunrise shook him from his torpor. To his left, in the distance, he saw the first rays of the sun setting the walls of Uruk ablaze. Around him, the sun was beginning to chase away the fog. It was then that he noticed them. Whole herds were there, silent, at the edge of the pool. He had not seen them approach. Large, indolent stags were quenching their thirst in the company of roe deer and fallow deer; a little to one side,

16

wild asses, which are called onagers, were mingling with a company of wild boars. There were more animals there than any hunter, in a whole lifetime of tracking, could ever have dreamed of killing.

Stunned, the hunter fixed his gaze on the heads crowned with great antlers, on the majestic tusks of the boars; he was astonished by the size of their rounded rumps, their barbaric spines. And suddenly, his gaze was snatched by a shape that had just emerged from the mist. Terror darkened the hunter's eyes: this thing that was coming and going, breathing, imposing its presence in the midst of the great stags, the roe does and the fallow deer, this thing WAS NOT AN ANIMAL!

Then without even thinking of taking his bow and spear, he fled toward Uruk.

Sitting cross-legged before the fire where meat was cooking, his father was eating in silence.

"Father," the young hunter articulated, "I saw the loulloû."
The father raised his vague eyes to his son, stopped chewing, and burped.

"The loulloû," the son insisted. "The wild man, if you will, the hulking brute, the rough-hewn one. I saw him as clearly as I see you now."
The father spat out a piece of bone hidden in the meat, fixed his gaze on his son:

17

"The loulloû does not live near men."

"I saw him as clearly as I see you now. He was in the midst of the beasts that come at night to the great marsh. I observed the herds, and in the middle of them was the loulloû."

"A wild boar, surely."

"A wild boar doesn't stand up on its hind legs."

"A roe deer."

"A roe deer doesn't laugh. I do believe I heard him laugh."
But the father refused to be persuaded. The wrinkles on his forehead deepened: he was searching his memory for the little he had been taught about the wild man. The loulloû lived in the time of the ancient day when, with a blow of a hoe¹, the sky and the earth were torn from one another. The gods had fashioned him crudely from clay. This was long before Lahar taught men to raise sheep and Ashan taught them to sow seeds². The loulloû knew nothing of all this, how to sow, how to care for livestock, or even how

Hoe: a tool with a sharp blade used for working the soil.

Lahar and Ashan are the gods who taught men to raise animals and cultivate the land. When he was created by the god Ea and the goddess Aruru, man was only a "loullou," that is to say, a crude man, who still had everything to learn to become a civilized man.

18

to hunt. No, the loulloû, knew nothing of all this. This is what the father, in halting words, drew from his memory and told his son. But the son would not be put off:

"Exactly, father, he doesn't know all that. He lives with the beasts, he is like them, he drinks water. When I fled, I found my traps: they were all broken. And the pits that I cover with reeds had been filled with earth. I'm sure it was him. He is intelligent, he defends his animal friends. He doesn't want them to be harmed!"

"Then," said the father, finally convinced, "this is what you must do. You will go and tell all this to King Gilgamesh. I am certain he will listen to you. Tell him the whole story and then, do as he tells you."

The hunter presented himself at the palace and requested an audience.

"Here," he said to the king, "is the adventure that befell me."
He recounted his encounter with Enkidu, the wild man. He described his body, his muscles, his rough-hewn appearance. He had never seen such a terrifying creature.

"No doubt," said the king, "you mistook him for a large wild boar."

19

"Excuse me, Your Majesty, but a wild boar does not walk on two legs."

"Then a wild goat. Goats stand on their hind legs to nibble leaves and fruit."

"But goats have horns; he had none. I tell you, it was a loulloû I saw. A gigantic human, strong as a rock fallen from the sky, with muscles that roll under his skin, and the neck of a bull! That is what I saw! I fled, because I was afraid of being crushed by a single one of his hands if he ever caught me! There is no man in the world stronger than him."

King Gilgamesh flinched as if he had just been insulted. A strange spark lit up in his eyes:

"I order that he be brought back here, to my city. Have Beauty-the-Joy accompany you and go back there. She is the best of my courtesans, she will know what to do. And when he is here, before me, we shall see what we shall see!"

Beauty-the-Joy

The hunter set off again, accompanied by the courtesan. It took them three days to reach the pool; they approached with caution. There was not the slightest sign of game. They settled in comfortably

20

and began to wait. After two days, they still had not seen a shadow of any game. But on the third day, the hunter touched Beauty-the-Joy's arm. A herd had silently approached the pool: the animals stood there, paddling gently in the water, relaxing their muscles after all their running in the steppe and drinking the clear water.

At first, the hunter did not see the loulloû. He was seized with doubt: had he dreamed it the first time? But the wild man was indeed there, in the midst of the herd. He was leaning over the pool and lapping up the water like an animal. He did not even know how to cup his hands together to hold the water, as men do when they drink from a spring! He lapped like a beast. Beauty-the-Joy was motionless. She who was an expert in men had never seen such a creature. Was he even a man, this rough-hewn brute, covered in hair, grunting and letting out cries from the depths of his throat, like a belling stag?

The hunter discreetly shook the courtesan:

"It's your turn to act, Beauty-the-Joy. Take off your clothes and show him your charms. Lure him, go on."
But the courtesan could not stop marveling at the incredible scene: a wild man in the midst of beasts! Her gaze was fixed on the

21

majestic heads of the great stags, on the snouts of the wild pigs, on the bumpy foreheads of the buffaloes with their thick horns, on their chests and their bitumen-colored loins. Beauty-the-Joy took it all in with a single glance: the elegant does and fallow deer made for running, the wild cows with their dreamy eyes, the onagers with their strange striped skin. It was as if all of animal society had arranged to meet at the watering hole. For the first time in her life, she was discovering the hidden world of wild animals, who usually keep their distance from humans. She trembled from it, fascinated and fearful at the same time, as if she were entering a sacred space. And he, the loulloû, moved without fear among these beasts. He caressed the spine of a buffalo, gently patted the flank of a doe; he advanced among these animals like a king among his people.

The hunter had to pinch Beauty-the-Joy's arm to finally bring her out of her fascination. She approached slowly, lay down on the grass, and waited for the loulloû to spot her. Then she removed her clothes to offer him her charms.
The wild man was wary at first, then he was caught in the trap of her beauty and came to lie down beside her. Beauty-the-Joy lavished him with sweet caresses, and he, the rough-hewn one,

22

took great pleasure in it. They kissed, they embraced, they cuddled. For six days and seven nights, they did not stop making love.

At the end of the seven nights, Enkidu wanted to leave with his animal friends, but they moved away from him. He tried to rejoin them, but his legs would no longer carry him. The seven nights spent with Beauty-the-Joy had tired him so much that he no longer knew how to run as before. So, he came back and sat down beside the courtesan. She spoke to him and he was astonished to understand what she was saying in human language, he who until now had only known the language of beasts:

"You are as handsome as a god, Enkidu. You cannot spend your whole life running in the steppe with the wild beasts. You don't know what you're missing by staying in these desert regions. I come from Uruk, the city you must have glimpsed in the distance without ever daring to approach. Solid ramparts protect it. There are gardens, trees in whose shade people rest. Every day there is music, there are celebrations. The men are strong fellows and the women are very gentle. There is a great temple called the Eanna. That is where Anu, the god of the Sky, and his lady Ishtar live. I will take you there. You will be able to meet our king, Gilgamesh. He has the vigor of a bull. No one can resist him."

23

Listening to Beauty-the-Joy, Enkidu pondered.

"Let's go," he said suddenly. "I will measure myself against your king. We shall see who is stronger: the man of the city or the man of the steppe."

"Think carefully, Enkidu, or you will say foolish things. No one is obliged to do what is beyond their means. In Uruk, all the men are forces of nature. They fear neither beasts nor the men of other cities. But none of them would dare to measure himself against Gilgamesh. He is quick as lightning, he strikes like thunder. And nothing tires him. He feasts with his courtesans, but by morning, there he is, on his feet, ready for any challenge. And if you dared to provoke him, you would still be beaten because of his intelligence. He calculates everything, he foresees everything. He can also be arrogant and brutal. Beware, Enkidu, this man is not entirely a man. He is two-thirds god and only one-third man. His father, Lugalbanda, was a demigod. And his mother is Ninsun-the-wild-cow."
But Enkidu insisted stubbornly:

"I was nourished with the good milk of the beasts of the steppe, I run as fast as an onager and I know how to fight with lions. I will face your king and I will win."
Beauty-the-Joy was suddenly afraid. She foresaw the fight, she shuddered at the thought of these two giants coming to blows, with neither one prevailing, and ending up killing each other.

"Listen, Enkidu my friend," the courtesan resumed, "who says the king wishes you harm? Why would he want to measure himself against you? He knows he is the strongest. Perhaps he wants to make you his friend. It was he who sent me to find you, it was on his order that I offered you my charms. Perhaps he is dreaming of you at this very moment. Come, my friend, let's be on our way. I am sure he is waiting for you."

The King's Two Dreams

Beauty-the-Joy gave one of her garments to Enkidu, then they set off. When evening came, they stopped at a shepherds' hut. The shepherds' eyes widened when they saw this hulking brute arrive, so massive he looked like a moving mountain. They said to one another: "This fellow looks like Gilgamesh, but rougher. To want to attack him would be like wanting to attack the ramparts of Uruk. Pure madness!" They offered bread and beer to the wild man, who sniffed them with suspicion.

24

25

"Eat the bread and drink the beer," said Beauty-the-Joy. "This is how men are accustomed to nourish themselves, while the beasts drink water from the pools."
Enkidu ate the bread and had seven more servings of beer. His heart was filled with cheer. He washed his body, then perfumed himself with fine oil. Now he resembled a true man. He was as handsome as a bridegroom.

When night came, he told the shepherds to sleep peacefully while he watched over the flocks. He seized a club and went out of the hut. While the shepherds slept, hiding in the shadows, he watched for the wolves and lions that dared to approach the flocks and slaughtered them without mercy. The next day, he continued on his way with Beauty-the-Joy.

While Enkidu was walking toward Uruk, King Gilgamesh had two dreams. In the first, he was surrounded by the stars of the sky and he saw a meteorite fall near him. He wanted to lift it, but it was too heavy. The people of Uruk came to caress the block of metal fallen from the sky, they cherished it as one would a toddler, and Gilgamesh took care of it as if it were a wife. He finally managed to lift it and placed it at the feet of his mother, Ninsun, who in

26

turn took great care of it, as if it were her son. He told the dream to his mother, who said to him:

"My son, here is the interpretation of the dream the gods have sent you: the stars represent the escort of strong men who are in your service. The block of celestial stone that fell so heavily beside you, that you could not lift at first and that you caressed, this block that you then succeeded in bringing to me and that I cherished like my own son, is a friend that the gods have decided to send you. He will be like another self to you, always there to help you. If in your dream you caressed it like a wife, it means he will always be there by your side, ready to help you. The gods could not have sent you a more beautiful dream, my son. It is favorable to you."

In the second dream, Gilgamesh saw an axe lying in the middle of a square. The crowd pressed in to admire it while Gilgamesh was full of affection for it, as if it were a wife. Then he placed it at the feet of his mother Ninsun, who took great care of it.
Ninsun said to him:

"Here is the interpretation of this second dream. The axe represents the very strong friend that the gods are going to send you. Stronger than a meteorite, he will be there by your side to defend and assist you. Yes, the

27

gods are with you, my son. They have just sent you two favorable dreams."

Gilgamesh replied to his mother:

"If a true friend is given to me, then I shall know no greater joy in all my existence. May these two dreams come true!"