كيم	Question Word	who?	kim	T
نه	Question Word	what?	né	T
كيمك	Question Word	whose?	kimin	T
نه‌نك	Question Word	of what?	nénin	T
كيمه	Question Word	to whom?	kimé	T
نه‌يه	Question Word	to which?	néyé	T
كيمى	Question Word	whom?	kimi	T
نه‌يى	Question Word	what? (accusative)	néyi	T
نره‌ده	Question Word	where?/wherein?	néréde	T
كيمدن	Question Word	from whom?	kimden	T
ندن	Question Word	from what?	néden	T
پدر	Noun	father	péder	P
طاش	Noun	stone	tash	T
موم	Noun	candle	moum	A
اوجاق	Noun	fireplace	ojaq	T
باليق	Noun	fish	balıq	T
اوردك	Noun	duck	ördek	T
اكمك	Noun	bread	ekmek	T
اوق	Noun	arrow	oq	T
كوك	Noun	root	kök	T
دودوك	Noun	whistle	düdük	T
طوق	Adjective	satiated	toq	T
قرق	Numeral	forty	qırq	T
يوك	Noun	load	yük	T
سو	Noun	water	sou	T
پدرك	Noun Form	of the father (genitive)	péderin	P
پدره	Noun Form	to the father (dative)	pédere	P
پدرى	Noun Form	the father (accusative)	péderi	P
پدرده	Noun Form	in the father (locative)	péderde	P
پدردن	Noun Form	from the father (ablative)	péderden	P
پدرلر	Noun	fathers	péderler	P
پدرلرك	Noun Form	of the fathers (genitive)	péderlerin	P
پدرلره	Noun Form	to the fathers (dative)	péderlere	P
پدرلرى	Noun Form	the fathers (accusative)	péderleri	P
پدرلرده	Noun Form	in the fathers (locative)	péderlerde	P
پدرلردن	Noun Form	from the fathers (ablative)	péderlerden	P
طاشك	Noun Form	of the stone (genitive)	tashın	T
طاشه	Noun Form	to the stone (dative)	tasha	T
طاشى	Noun Form	the stone (accusative)	tashı	T
طاشده	Noun Form	in the stone (locative)	tashda	T
طاشدن	Noun Form	from the stone (ablative)	tashdan	T
باليقلر	Noun	fishes	balıqlar	T
باليقلرك	Noun Form	of the fishes (genitive)	balıqların	T
باليقلره	Noun Form	to the fishes (dative)	balıqlara	T
باليقلرى	Noun Form	the fishes (accusative)	balıqları	T
باليقلرده	Noun Form	in the fishes (locative)	balıqlarda	T
باليقلردن	Noun Form	from the fishes (ablative)	balıqlardan	T
قويونك	Noun Form	of the well (genitive)	qouyounoun	T
قويويه	Noun Form	to the well (dative)	qouyouya	T
قويويى	Noun Form	the well (accusative)	qouyouyi	T
قويوده	Noun Form	in the well (locative)	qouyouda	T
قويودن	Noun Form	from the well (ablative)	qouyoudan	T